https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RCI28U2TvVs&list=WL&index=2&t=92s
Ancient Athens: The Rise Of The Most Influential Society In History | Metropolis
History

- [Announcer] This channel is part of
the HistoryHit Network. (dramatic music)
(waves crashing) (dramatic music)
- [Narrator] Over 2000 years ago,
the first great European capital cities
rose around the shores of the Mediterranean.
More and more people lived in
increasingly crowded conditions.
The arts, commerce, and sciences flourished.
Struggling for power and influence,
these cities tried to outshine each other
by erecting magnificent buildings.
People from different cultures and parts of the world
were drawn to these cities,
seeking prosperity and happiness.
(child breathing heavily)
(dramatic music)
The incomparable rise of Athens
began 500 years before the birth of Christ.
No other city has shaped the Western world
so much as Athens.
History's most famous philosophers lived and taught here.
The fine arts and natural sciences blossomed.
And it was the citizens of Athens who gave the world
a new type of government: democracy.
The Greek historian Pausanias
wrote about an extraordinary woman of that era.
Phryne was one of Athens' most famous hetaira,
or courtesans, the mistress of important men:
scholars, artists, and politicians fell under her spell.
Her wealth and beauty were legendary,
but pride led her into mortal danger.
(people chattering)
Phryne angered the gods,
but it was mortals who would judge her.
(dramatic music soars)
In the fifth century BC, 300,000 people lived in Athens.
The city was at its peak.
Then came a long period of decline
and it was only in the 20th century
that Athens regained its previous size.
Today, it has over 4 million inhabitants.
(people chattering) (speaking in Greek)
It's just after sunrise,
Architect Nikos Toganidis is expecting a special delivery.
(truck engine rumbling)
On the truck is a marble block weighing a ton,
for one of history's most exciting restoration projects.
(dramatic piano music)
It has to be hoisted 150 meters up
the rocky slope of the Acropolis, or Citadel,
which was the impregnable center of ancient Athens.
(dramatic music intensifies)
The Acropolis is crowned by the city's most famous building,
the Parthenon, which the Athenians built
to celebrate their victory in 479 BC over the Persians.
2,500 years later,
this monument is being taken apart and reassembled
to rectify the mistakes of 19th century restorations.
The Parthenon was the most outstanding building of its time.
A two story high gallery of columns supported
the roof of this temple erected by the citizens
in honor of Athene, the goddess of victory.
In the huge entrance halls stood her statue,
12 meters high, decorated with gold and ivory.
(machinery whirring)
Today's workshops are exactly
where the original workers huts once stood.
(chisels clinking)
After the restoration, the Parthenon
will still have its familiar look of a ruin.
The approach is to repair or complete
the damaged parts and to use newly sculpted marble blocks
only when absolutely necessary.
- It's amazing in every point,
as we are studying and we are working all these years
close to the monument, we are discovering, again,
the same techniques.
We are obliged to do the same things
because we understand, finally,
that it's the best way to do that.
- [Narrator] Piece by piece,
the Parthenon is being dismantled.
This is the only way the architectural sins
of previous restorations can be corrected.
(chisel clinking) (speaking in Greek)
Today's architects aim to make their work
as historically accurate as possible.
Their respect for the tremendous technical
and logistical achievements of the ancient builders
increases every day.
- Knowing all this facilities that you have in our hands,
papers, computers, whatever, how difficult is to organize
and to control all these things.
I cannot imagine that period without paper.
Imagine where they were drawing,
how they can communicate and to do this fine work.
It's incredible.
(workers chattering)
- [Narrator] The Parthenon was built in 15 years,
beginning in 447 BC.
The Greek philosophers were laying
the foundations of the modern sciences.
Pythagoras had developed
the basic principles of mathematics,
and Democritus would soon declare
the atom to be the foundation of all things.
The Parthenon is proof of the superb building techniques
of the ancient Greeks. (dramatic music)
The sides of these columns are tapered.
If extended, the sides would eventually meet
at a point several kilometers in the sky.
So none of the columns is truly vertical,
yet they are all executed precisely to the millimeter.
- Every stone has secrets, let's say,
from the architectural point of view,
and the proportions are special.
And also there are other things about the the function,
the real function of the building,
how it's penetrating the water, for instance,
the curvature of the floor,
probably it's one of these reasons.
The material that they use to connect
the blocks between them, the metal elements, I mean.
The technique, it's similar
than the metal work of the (mumbles) for instance.
(dramatic piano music)
- [Narrator] The ancient builders achieved these
perfect proportions using only geometric calculations.
Compass, ruler, and plumb line were their only tools.
While the Acropolis was the place
to honor democracy with magnificent monuments,
it was put into practice at the foot
of the hill in the Agora.
The Agora was the marketplace of ancient Athens.
In the city center, archeologists
from the American School of Classical Studies
have been working for the past 70 years.
They have unearthed a densely built up residential area
at the edge of the Agora.
Professor John Camp leads the excavations.
- The purpose of the excavations
is to uncover the center of ancient Athens.
That is where the public life took place.
And around the big square, which was the Agora proper.
They were all the public buildings you needed
to run the city, the Senate building, the archive building,
the magistrates offices, the law courts, the Mint,
pretty much everything you needed
in an administrative way was somewhere near the square.
And our purpose is to expose the historic center of Athens.
- [Narrator] The Agora was the social and political
meeting place of the Athenians.
People came to see and to be seen.
(mystical music) (people chattering)
The history of Phryne begins on the Agora.
Phryne has achieved wealth and status
through her beauty and intelligence.
(men speaking in Greek)
Her success has aroused envy
and rumors have spread that could prove dangerous to her.
- I know, I know. - No.
- [Narrator] Phryne is used to curiosity,
but she has no inkling of the scandal that is brewing.
She's being accused of a capital offense: blasphemy.
She is rumored to have commissioned the sculptor Praxiteles
to create a statue of the goddess Aphrodite
in her own likeness.
(mystical music continues) (birds chirping)
The representation of nude bodies or even erotic scenes
was not frowned upon by ancient Athenians.
But for an hetaira to be portrayed as the goddess of beauty
would surely bring divine wrath upon the city.
In ancient times, the Agora was an open square,
shaded by trees and surrounded by spacious arcades.
A restored version of such an arcade,
the two story Stoa of Attalos now houses
the American School of Classical Studies.
(dramatic music)
Here in the shade, the Athenian merchants had their stalls
and citizens gathered to exchange news and gossip.
Nowadays, the finds from the Agora excavations
are examined and archived here at the Institute.
- The square itself was used for a variety of functions.
One day they might set up booths and have a market,
on another day, they might be using it for an election.
Another time, it could be for athletic contests,
for military drill, for festivals,
for spectacles of all sorts.
So it would be used for a variety of purposes
every single day, but not always the same purpose.
And then around it, in the buildings
is simply where the city was managed by the magistrates,
by the boule or the Senate of the 500
and by the boards and commissions, the water commissioners,
the green commissioners, all the people responsible
for running this huge city
had their their administrative offices
somewhere right next to the square.
- [Narrator] Even in a large city like Athens,
the Agora functioned as a village square.
Direct communication between citizens
was the basis for the development of democracy.
(dramatic music)
The archeologists have found a deep well
at the edge of the Agora.
It was dug at the time the Parthenon was built.
(machinery creaking)
(water bubbling)
Professor Camp's team has been studying this well
for three years now.
They are gradually getting an idea
of what this site may once have looked like.
Behind the administrative buildings adjoining the Agora,
narrow Little streets led into a cramped,
densely built up residential area.
Here lived the common citizens,
close to the place that contributed so significantly
to the development of democracy.
- While there are certainly very rich houses
and elegant villas, most of the houses
we have near the Agora are very poor
and not very comfortable.
They have clay floors, their rooms are
centered around a courtyard which would have provided
some light and air, but they would've been very dark
for our point of view, very badly furnished,
probably not too many windows because
no way of closing them off and still letting the light in.
So I think that's one of the reasons
it's such an outdoor, public life
is being home wasn't all that much fun.
- [Narrator] The artifacts are analyzed
and classified in the Institute's laboratory.
Sometimes it's the small items
that reveal a great deal about larger issues.
The purpose and significance of these small bowls
was a puzzle at first.
They were found near the hearth
in the dwellings of humble Athenians,
alongside the burnt bones of small animals.
They may have been sacrificial bowls
for domestic religious rituals,
asking the gods for health, happiness,
and success in business.
(crickets chirping)
Religion played a large part in Athenian daily life.
The visible proof of that was the Parthenon.
An elaborate frieze that once crowned the Parthenon
illustrates the Athenians relationship with their gods.
It was originally painted,
but the colors wore away long ago.
The frieze shows the magnificent annual procession
of the Athenians to the Acropolis
in honor of their patron Athene.
The Panathenaea was a colorful procession up the steep hill,
where charioteers demonstrated their skill
at maneuvering their nimble chariots.
Venerable elders accompanied the procession.
Young men carried heavy amphoras of water.
The Panathenaea involved sacrificing animals to the gods.
Such events for always a big celebration for everyone.
There were no priests in democratic Athens.
Athenians related to their gods
in a relaxed and confident way.
The Gods frequently descended from Mount Olympus,
taking on human form to mingle with mortals
and enjoy themselves licentiously.
But the Gods demanded humility
and absolute respect from mortals.
The Athenians know that Praxiteles is working
on a statue of Aphrodite, the goddess of beauty.
And the rumors actually seem to be true.
(dramatic music)
Phryne is the model for the image of the goddess.
(door creaks) (door shuts)
If gods take on human form,
it's seen as an expression of their divinity.
But for a mortal woman to allow herself
to be represented as a goddess is a crime.
By this presumption,
Phryne puts her life at liberty at risk.
In Athens, the well to do citizens
were the chief patrons of artists such as Praxiteles.
It was considered good form to support the arts.
Greek culture flourished thanks to this spirit of patronage.
Even today, the art of ancient Athens
provides people with a livelihood.
Reproductions of antique art objects
are sold all over the world.
(machinery whirring)
The art of casting in bronze
lives on in this Athenian workshop.
It was one of the earliest technologies
and it's been practiced for over 4,000 years.
A tripodon, a large bowl on three legs, is being cast today.
A new mould is made for every casting
and each of the many individual parts
requires a separate mould.
Generations of fathers have passed down to their sons
the composition of a special kind of earth
that makes it possible
to produce these detailed casting moulds.
(machinery whirring)
(speaking in Greek)
The mold for the underside of the bowl is ready.
With an ordinary spoon, the bronze caster
is digging channels into which
the liquid bronze will later be poured.
(dramatic music)
The inside of the bowl is decorated with delicate reliefs.
This is the most difficult part
because every detail must be correct
before the moulds are put together.
The bronze has been heated for over two hours.
Now, the molten metal is poured into the moulds.
(liquid roaring) (fire crackling)
(liquid sizzling)
(speaking in Greek)
Opening the earth mould destroys it.
Now we will see if the cast has been successful.
Piece by piece, the foundry workers
lift the separate parts out of the steaming moulds.
There is still a great deal of delicate work to be done
before the tripodon is completed.
(gentle music)
Tripodons played a special role in the ancient world.
They were handed out as prizes
to the patrons of successful plays.
Phryne, who financed a theater group,
also received such a prize.
The tripodons were placed on high stone pedestals
in public view, lining the street leading to the theater,
which is still called Tripodon Street.
(chisels clicking)
The vast majority of ancient bronze artworks
have disappeared, melted down by later generations.
Many marble statues were burned to make lime,
textiles, and almost all wood or leather artifacts
have also been lost.
The ancient world was colorful
and traders brought exotic goods to Athens
from all over the world.
(cars whooshing) The market,
where today's inhabitants of the old city
shop for their fresh fruit, vegetables, meat, and fish.
The ancient Athenians ate more modestly.
Very few could afford meat.
Poorer people ate it only when an animal
was sacrificed for a special festival.
Small animals were kept in the house
and supplied milk and eggs. (birds chirping)
But Athens was close to the sea,
so at least there was plenty of fish,
which, with bread and thick lentil soup,
formed a staple diet.
Fruit and vegetables were very different from today's.
The melons were tiny, apples rare,
and it was two millennia before
potatoes and tomatoes reached Europe.
But in addition to figs and olives,
Athenians were also fond of grasshoppers and cicadas,
which Aristotle praised as great delicacies.
- It's fairly clear that Athenian trading connections
were very extensive.
A lot of their grain, maybe most of their grain,
came from the Ukraine, from the north side of the Black Sea.
They were importing wine from Asia Minor
and the island of Rhodes.
Athenian coins have been found in Egypt.
They've been found practically as far away as Afghanistan
and far to the west as well.
The coins obviously can pass from hand to hand,
but it's clear that goods came in from all over the world.
- [Narrator] Amphoras were the universal containers
for transporting goods in antiquity.
Hundreds were excavated at the Agora alone.
Athens was a trading power
and democracy took up a great deal of citizen's time,
but no one would lose money
by taking part in political decisions.
The potter who made these amphoras also received money
when he went to vote.
(dramatic piano music)
Outside the city gates were the city's quarries.
In scorching heat, thousands of slaves cut the marble
for Athens' magnificent buildings.
It is estimated that there were three slaves
to every free citizen of Athens.
Today, the marble used to reconstruct
the Parthenon is cut by a handful of workers
using heavy equipment.
(machinery whirring)
The latest technology is used to cut the marble.
Specialists drill holes several meters into the rock.
Long steel cables set with diamond chips
are threaded through the rock like a giant band saw
to cut blocks weighing several tons.
(machinery whirring)
But the ancient methods of getting marble for buildings
such as the Parthenon have not been lost either.
(tools clinking)
The stone is still split the same way as it was
2000 years ago, with heavy hammers, iron chisels,
and a deep knowledge of the structure of marble.
The gigantic blocks had to be transported
many kilometers to the Acropolis.
Carts, pulled by several teams of oxen,
hauled the huge loads.
And while in the city, splendid monuments
were being erected to the glory of democracy,
in the quarries, those at the bottom of society
were slaving under the most inhumane conditions.
- Slavery was certainly a fact of daily life
and it's, I think,
more a question of manpower than anything.
But when we look at the records
for the buildings on the Acropolis,
we find that free Athenians, Greeks from other city-states,
and slaves all worked on the building together,
all doing exactly the same jobs,
and all being paid a daily wage.
And the lot of a slave varied tremendously.
At the bottom end of the scale,
they worked in the silver mines,
and their lives must have been very hard and very short.
There were slaves who were public servants,
like accountants, whose lives were not too bad.
And some slaves even ran some of the major banks in Athens.
- [Narrator] Slavery was taken completely for granted,
even in the enlightened democracy of Athens.
While Athenian citizens were
primarily concerned with politics,
slaves guaranteed the commercial success of the city.
(gentle music)
Many slaves were well trained artisans.
Their work is the model for today's stone masons
on the Acropolis.
New pieces for the Parthenon
are chiseled from the blocks with utmost precision.
(chisel clinking)
(tools clinking) When the chisels become blunt,
the blacksmith provides new sharp tools,
like Hephaestus, the god of fire and forge,
he has mastered the interplay of fire and water
to produce hard steel.
(tools sizzling)
(chisel clinking)
The finest tools for the best stone masons in Greece.
In the residential quarter around the Agora,
buildings were constructed with much less care.
Houses were small and cramped.
Even though their inhabitants were not the rich of Athens,
here too, archeologists are uncovering shards
of elaborately painted bowls and vessels.
(dramatic music) When restored, they provide
an impressive image of Greek daily life.
- The art mostly reflects the aristocratic style of living.
And there were plenty of aristocrats and rich people
even in democratic Athens,
there are some pots that show sort of normal activities
and shops and fish mongers cutting up fish
and butchers and people working in workshops.
But generally, the artist is sponsored by the aristocracy
and they're gonna be interested
in feasting and hunting and partying
and the things that aristocrats like to do.
- [Narrator] Athenian democracy had deprived
the aristocracy of power.
Every citizen had equal rights,
but not all citizens were equal.
Many old aristocratic families harked back
to a long tradition of privilege
and still had considerable wealth and influence
even in the democracy.
They were the ones who could afford these costly amphoras.
The best vase painters were famous throughout Greece
and their work fetched high prices.
Dimitris Stathopoulos carries on
the art of the ancient masters with great passion.
(speaking in Greek)
(dramatic piano music)
The secret lies in the paint.
Liquid clay is used to paint the vases before firing.
Only after they've been fired in the kiln
do the vases acquire their characteristic color.
But it isn't just the artistic or technical aspects
of the painter's work that matter to him.
(speaking in Greek)
The symposia of Athenian high society were famous.
In those days, symposium meant simply drinking session.
(dramatic music)
Rich Athenians attended lavish feasts
with music and dancing.
The symposia hosted by Phryne were legendary.
Her guests were philosophers, artists, and politicians.
(dramatic music continues)
This evening, Praxiteles is the center of attention.
He has announced that he will soon
unveil his statue of Aphrodite.
The guest vie at telling tales
while drinking games and riddles
amuse the men and their courtesans.
In the course of the evening,
the drinking bowls reveal their secret.
(speaking in Greek)
(dramatic music) (woman laughs)
But this evening, Phryne's symposium is disrupted.
Praxiteles' slave would not normally be allowed to intrude,
but the news he has rushed through the dark streets
to tell is too appalling.
(man speaking in Greek) (suspenseful music)
Phryne has a premonition of the catastrophe.
(woman speaking in Greek)
(crickets chirping) (man speaking in Greek)
At the studio, their worst fears are confirmed.
Intruders have broken in and smashed Praxiteles work,
thus revealing Phryne's secret.
(dramatic music intensifies)
Now the whole city knows that Phryne intended
to create the image of a goddess in her own likeness.
No mortal has ever dared do this.
Her act disturbed the delicate balance
between the worlds of the gods and of mortals.
(bird cries)
To ensure the continued benevolence
of the gods on Mount Olympus,
the Athenians established holy places
throughout their realm.
They honored more than their patron Athene.
The temple at Cape Sounion was dedicated to Poseidon,
the god of the sea, who protected shipping
and trade with the colonies.
Athens had established commercial links
from Sicily to the Black Sea.
There were even Greek settlements in Egypt.
(birds crying)
But the Gods were known to be capricious.
It was better not to rely only on them.
To safeguard their influence and repel enemies,
Athens maintained an enormous navy.
Pride of the fleet were the triremes,
war galleys with three banks of oars,
which were able to protect the heavily loaded cargo ships.
In the harbor at Piraeus,
200 of these ships were waiting to be deployed.
One of the civic duties of Athenians
was to crew these dreaded warships.
Fully mobilized, the Athenian fleet required 40,000 oarsmen.
While the rich could pay for the upkeep of the fleet
and send their slaves to sea,
the poor had no choice but to do the rowing themselves.
Every trireme was manned by 170 oarsmen.
They were often crammed together for days on end
and the heat below deck must have been dreadful.
At the beginning of the fifth century BC,
the great strategist Themistocles
convinced the Athenians to invest
a large proportion of their national assets in the fleet,
thus turning the city state into a sea power.
For a few decades, Athens dominated
the Eastern Mediterranean
and the numerous Greek city states.
But soon the old conflicts broke out again
and Greece became embroiled
in seemingly endless wars once more.
- Warfare was virtually a yearly occurrence.
And these are citizen armies,
so that virtually everybody must have fought
quite frequently.
They were all eligible for military duty from age 18 to 59.
They had large land armies and they had those huge fleets
that required tens of thousands of rowers.
So I think most Athenians experience war
several times in the course of their lives.
It's done seasonally, that is to say, if you're a farmer,
you're gonna attend your fields first
and then go fight your neighbor
when you're not trying to get in your crop.
But it was a part of daily life, no question.
(men speaking in Greek)
- [Narrator] The theater provided
distraction from daily cares.
(men speaking in Greek)
Under the guardianship of merry Dionysus, the god of wine,
playwrights pilloried, often coarsely,
the abuses prevalent in their society.
Dignitaries and politicians in their seats of honor
were often the targets of this public mockery.
(men speaking in Greek) (dramatic music)
Theater was a democratic institution
to which every Athenian had access.
There was room for more than 17,000 spectators
in a steeply tiered seating.
(man shouting in Greek)
Political decisions were made on the Pnyx,
the place of the people's assembly,
an inconspicuous, open space within sight of the Acropolis.
Here, the first parliament in history assembled.
The most famous orators of antiquity stood on these steps
and addressed the citizens of Athens.
Voting by show of hands took place on the Pnyx,
the birthplace of democracy.
Athenians lived in an informational society.
Every citizen was obliged to learn to read and write.
During the excavations that the Agora alone,
thousands of inscriptions on stone were uncovered.
Public appeals, information for citizens,
or funerary inscriptions like this stele.
(mallet thudding)
- In a democracy such as the Athenian one,
virtually the entire government would change every year,
except for a handful of officials.
And that means you need very, very good record keeping
because not all the projects are going to stop in a year
and somebody has to keep track of the money.
So you have to say how much money you got
when you became the grain commissioner,
how you spent that money, and how much money
you passed on the following year
to the next grain commissioner.
So essentially, you have to have excellent record keeping
because of this constant changing of the officials.
- [Narrator] The Greek script has not changed
in more than 2000 years.
This stele was erected in memory of a young woman
whose name is immortalized here beside her husband's.
No other culture has left behind
so much written evidence as Athens.
So we know that Phryne did actually live.
However, whether the details of her story
are truth or fiction is still in doubt.
(dramatic music)
The court of Athens is in session.
Phryne appears, flanked by her lawyer Hypereides
and is met by her accuser.
(man shouting in Greek)
(dramatic music continues)
Not even influential patrons have been able
to prevent the legal proceedings.
Opinion in the city has turned against the famous courtesan.
If the jury finds her guilty,
she faces the threat of banishment, slavery, or even death.
But Phryne knows what she's doing.
(men speaking in Greek) (people groaning)
To everyone's surprise,
Hypereides does not dispute the charge against Phryne.
(man speaking in Greek)
Then she herself provides the proof
that her beauty is worthy of a goddess.
(dramatic music)
If ever there was a mortal woman
who might lend her body to Aphrodite, it is Phryne.
The independent judicial system
was one of the greatest achievements of Athenian democracy.
Citizens had no obligation to any ruler or God,
only to themselves.
A demonstration of this is the Propylaea,
which is also being restored.
For 2,500 years, the Propylaea has been the gateway
to the Acropolis and the Parthenon.
Like the Parthenon, the Propylaea
is being renovated in a historically accurate way.
To this end, every stone is being removed,
cleaned of old mortar, and restored.
(chisels clinking)
The architect Tassos Tanoulas is overseeing the work,
first planned over 30 years ago.
His interests extend beyond architecture.
For him, the Propylaea is a symbol of Athenian democracy.
What appears to be a temple is not dedicated to any God.
Rather, it is a place of leisure for the citizens of Athens.
- The Propylaea is a secular building
and this is a new idea in the ancient Greek architecture.
This is a building which was meant for the people.
It had the benches all around,
all along the walls of the porches and the central building,
and also the rooms of the wings, which were never built,
or the pinakothiki, which still is a room.
They were meant for sacrificial meals.
So they were for the people to be, to enter them,
and to enjoy their architecture and luxury.
So there was a temple's luxury in a secular building.
(dramatic music)
- [Narrator] For the first time in history,
a splendid building such as the Propylaea
was not erected for gods or kings,
but by citizens for the citizens of a free city.
It is a symbol of the self confidence
and pride of democratic Athens.
Phryne has been acquitted and Praxiteles
can now complete the statue to praise and honor Aphrodite.
The historian Pausanias reports
that the goddess was flattered by Phryne's beauty
and the gods were reconciled with Athens.
Though the original is lost,
the statue is thought to be the first
significant nude of a woman ever sculpted.
The rise of Athens to a leading position
among Greek cities was due to democracy,
which led to an unparalleled blossoming of the arts
and sciences in the fourth and fifth centuries BC.
The power of Athens extended far beyond Greece
and throughout the Mediterranean.
But even in ancient times,
the influence of the metropolis began to wane.
Other cities took over its leading role,
cities such as Alexandria, Carthage, and Rome.
But none of those could dispute
the place of Athens in history.
This was the cradle of democracy.
(dramatic music intensifies)
