https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g28jI97m1xI
Pantanal, Brazil, Is the Largest Tropical Wetland on Earth | Exotic Animals Documentary
Nature

Western Brazil.
This region is home to more species than almost any other in the world.
It's a treasure trove for any biologist.
This is the Pantanal.
The world's largest tropical wetland.
I am Lydia Möcklinghoff
from Germany.
Working in this spectacular water world is an adventure every day.
While elsewhere the wildlife hides
in dense rainforests, it's pretty much
on show here.
These are perfect conditions for a behavioural biologist like me.
I came here for the giant anteaters.
My workplace is the Fazenda Barranco Alto,
a ranch in the middle of nowhere.
Lots of cattle and nature.
That's characteristic for this part of the Pantanal.
Welcome to my second home!
Which is also home to some of the most
impressive - and weirdest wildlife
in South America.
5:30. Time to start the day.
When I first came to the Fazenda in 2010,
everything was new and exciting.
Today I'm part of the team and I return for a few months every year.
The Fazenda is a traditional cattle ranch.
It's run by pantaneiros, indigenous cowboys.
Around here, the horse is pretty much the best way to get around.
Some pantaneiros are real artists.
They craft wonderful bridles, saddles, and lassos
from homemade leather.
By now my preparations for the day have become second nature.
When I go out into the wilderness,
I need to take a lot of stuff. Obviously, there's
no corner shop around. Still, as experience shows,
you always forget something.
The Pantanal is the world's largest inland wetland
and situated right in the middle of South America
on the borders of Brazil, Bolivia and Paraguay.
A pristine paradise the size of Great Britain.
It takes a bit of practice to open and close the gates from horseback.
The fences help to separate the cattle herds and to drive them
from one area to another.
They are no barriers to the wild inhabitants.
Hello, little Pampas deer. Hello, little Pampas deer.
The density of wildlife on this ancient farmland
is virtually second to none.
There are animals everywhere around us - to be heard
and seen. The macaws are noisy beauties.
They are very special parrots.
Those are Hyacinth macaws in the tree above -
5 of them.
Once they were as good as extinct. In the 1970s the populations
were in free fall, even though they were protected.
It was prohibited to sell or hunt them,
yet they were declining rapidly. And nobody understood why.
Because they weren't really studied.
We didn't know what the birds needed for survival or how to help them.
But then they started a research project and found
that macaws prefer one special tree species to nest.
The manduvi tree, like the one behind me. Its wood is very soft,
so they can easily carve holes into it. Also, they only eat nuts from 2
palm species. So they're pretty specialized, and those were exactly
the kind of trees that were cut down first to make room for cattle.
That means, the macaws were protected,
but had lost their livelihoods. In the end, the research
helped the conservation effort: Nesting boxes were put up
and the locals were very committed.
So by now, the hyacinth macaw has greatly recovered
and seems to be everywhere around. At 5
in the morning they basically kick you out of bed -
they literally scream in your windows.
Even so, the macaws are one of my favourite birds.
Every time a flock passes above, I need to stop and admire them.
When I first came to the Fazenda I was afraid
I would never learn to navigate
this maze of woods, lakes and savannahs.
But now I know each and every tree and lake.
My first job today takes me into the grassland.
There's a termite mound.
The termites carry nutrients and seeds into it.
And after a while it turns into this little island,
a little clump of trees. The ground is actually
richer in minerals than the surrounding land.
That makes it more appealing for animals, and we regularly discover
scratch trees that are used by anteaters and other animals, too.
This is a very strongly used trunk. Some of the marks are fresh.
Those are super deep grooves.
The torn bark here looks redder, that means, they're recent.
So there's definitely a giant anteater around. It's worth a try.
I'll put up a camera trap. I'd like to find out
whether anteaters deliberately choose a tree,
or if they don't really care what they scratch on.
With marks this fresh, the anteater could still be close.
And ... I get lucky!
There are some suspicious noises coming from these scrubs.
Something moving.
We can walk while it's noisy and won't hear us.
Digging madly now.
There's no question, giant anteaters are "special".
Maybe not the brightest animals on earth,
but extremely loveable. And perfectly adapted to their habitat.
They have banana-shaped snouts that they stick in the earth
to rummage for their favourite food: Ants and termites.
From the snout to the tip of the bushy tail
an anteater reaches a length of almost 2 metres.
This one is so occupied with its foraging
that I can easily follow unnoticed.
That's perfect for studying its behaviour.
Anteaters have strong claws on their fore feet.
They mainly use them to dig for food.
Still, they are also useful weapons, when push comes to shove.
In addition, anteaters have a strong sense of smell
to pick out their prey underground.
60 centimetres of sticky tongue lap up a mixture of sand and ants -
about 30.000 insects a day,
which makes a meagre 180 grammes of food.
They totally mad about fire ants.
And you actually see that it stings.
They brush them off like crazy.
But they love it.
Fire ants really live up to their name -
as anyone who has come in close contact
with them will tell you.
Great!
I've known this guy for years.
It's always good to meet them again
and learn about their home range and where they roam.
So that was a wonderful sighting! I'll leave him alone now. See ya!
He dug mega deep!
Really, really deep. If I put my hand in, it goes all the way down.
It's the whole of his head - that's why his face was so dirty.
Those must be extremely tasty ants if he goes to such lengths.
In the Pantanal's south there are thousands of lakes; some of them
so overgrown by water plants that they are only visible from above.
This is the greatest advantage of being on horse:
I can manage deeper water.
But - I need to watch carefully
for unpleasant surprises between the plants.
Caimans don't attack anything as large as my horse and me.
But if one splashed away suddenly, my horse might bolt.
Which would be anything but ideal in the middle of the swamp.
The southern screamers have long noticed me
and alert the rest of the Pantanal!
The capybaras don't really care.
The largest rodents on earth may have many enemies,
but humans are no longer among them.
Besides, there's strength in numbers.
Capybaras are true herbivores. And so they like
to bathe in their vegetable soup.
The head of the family is easily recognizable
by the gland on his nose.
He keeps an eye on things.
Especially the next door neighbours and their young.
The mother caiman guards her young in the first few months.
They have to find
their own food though.
Some lakes are devoid of plants, because their water is salty.
They are called salinas.
Capybaras also graze on dry land. Some families
dwell along the salinas.
They have gotten used to the saltwater.
During the midday heat
they like to relax in the "pool".
They are not the only ones.
Caimans are cousins of the alligator,
but only reach a maximum length of 2 metres.
They are stealth hunters, ...
... quietly creeping closer ...
... until the time is right.
The capybaras keep a close eye on them
and hold their distance. Finally,
the boss has had enough.
He's familiar with the neighbours and knows when it's time to leave.
During my studies in the Pantanal I found many answers,
but also loads of new questions. So I adopted
a new project besides my anteaters.
I'd like to know which mammals live in the various
habitats around the ranch.
It's challenging. I use a computer-generated grid
with intersections about a kilometre apart.
Once a year I set up camera traps in these locations -
and some of them are awfully hard to reach.
So: Squeeze through here or take the path? It's a bit off course.
There's no getting into the forest without a machete.
A thorny bromeliad. Get caught in that and you can forget your pants.
And we're in the thick of it.
The paths are overgrown in no time.
I have to cut a new one every year.
We'll have to fight our way through.
It's not that easy. We'll do it like
the tapirs and just stomp through.
Waiting for the signal ...
There's my tree! Found it!
Thanks to the GPS I manage to find the same spot again
every year.
So those are the pathetic leftovers.
That tree didn't look so well last year. I mean,
it wasn't award material or anything.
But it was okay or a camera trap. And now ...
It's got to point in the same direction -
so I can't just pick any other tree.
Please don't tip over.
Okay ... don't breathe! No touching.
Look! I didn't see that path before!
Yes. Perfect.
I would like to set up all of my 10 camera traps today.
That could be a problem though, as some of my locations
are on the other side of the Rio Negro.
During the rainy season the water level rises
by several metres, and then slowly goes down again.
I'm not sure if we can already cross.
No. No way.
The horse always knows best. It refuses to go on.
Hello, Mr. Rhea.
Flirting, are we? Charming.
At least I can set up a few of my camera traps.
And - I meet an old acquaintance.
May I introduce: Clawdia. I've known her for years.
It's not easy to tell the sex of an anteater,
but with her I know. After all, I've met her with more than one baby.
It's good to see her again. She's like an old friend to me.
Today, the cowboys are planning to drive 500 cattle
to the outer regions of the ranch.
But first the animals are sorted and get medical care.
Some of the calves have navel infections and need
an antiseptic treatment.
The mother tries to do a runner, but Tom knows his stuff.
He easily lassoes it.
The Pantaneiros work
with calm concentration.
They respect the animals.
And that's not only because frantic and violent behaviour
can result in a stampede.
With them it's a code of honour.
Young cattle always follow the experienced leaders.
The cowboys pick those out
and drive them ahead.
This is no factory farming.
Extremely few animals graze on huge expanses of land.
They aren't fed with soy or the likes.
The cattle of the Nelore breed are well-adapted and live off
the local grasses in the wetlands.
Back at the Fazenda I look at
the pictures from one of the camera traps.
It's like opening a present; you never know, what you might find.
This time it's a curious puma.
Thanks to my cameras I also
witnessed a completely unknown behaviour in my anteaters.
They climb trees! But why?
I assume they leave scent marks,
as a form of communication.
Anteaters are natural loners,
but they still need to rendezvous during mating season.
And apparently, they also sort out hierarchies that way.
The Pantanal is no place for quiet!
The screeching and squawking of parakeets,
macaws and other odd birds never cease.
At the end of the day we all meet up at the Galpao - the barn.
Here we drink an ice-cold mate, called Terere.
Weslen tells me they found a dead young cow today,
probably killed by a big cat.
I'm pretty tired,
but curiosity gets the better of me.
I really have to put up a camera there and see
the "beef-eater" for myself.
Once again I pass the many gates - and get stopped
by a furry guard.
The tamandua is the giant anteater's little cousin.
When it feels threatened
it rears up on its hind legs and tries to look dangerous.
But then it can't resist the tasty termites.
In contrast to his larger relatives the tamandua is a very good climber.
We've almost reached the dead cow, and -
lo and behold - we discover fresh puma tracks in the sand.
Pumas are widespread in all of the Americas;
from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego way in the south.
The cats are very adaptable and extremely shy.
So I put up "surveillance" and hide myself away in the bushes.
Jackpot! A female puma turns up at the carcass for a midnight snack.
And then it gets even better.
I discover a little spotted cat in a tree.
It's a puma cub!
These are extremely rare shots.
It's my best cat sighting ever.
When the female has left, a second youngster creeps closer.
The mother has killed the cow and opened the carcass in one place.
During the day she left her prey
covered with sand, well hidden from uninvited guests.
After a while the second cub joins in. It's a bit shy
at first ...
but then it claims the best spot!
Here I am, seated in a South American shrub in the middle of the night,
with 2 young pumas bickering right in front of me.
Even after all these years the Pantanal holds
new experiences for me.
Nightfall doesn't mean bedtime around here.
So it's no big surprise I meet an old friend
on my way home.
Amadeu the Anteater is so busy feeding, he has no eyes for me.
It has been a long and exciting night.
Today I'm off with my second favourite means of travel:
The canoe. Hopefully, I can install the remaining cameras
on the other side of the river.
The giant otters are also up and about.
The whole family sets out for an early fishing trip.
They eye me and my canoe with suspicion.
Giant otters use a lot of different calls and sometimes even
clan-specific dialects.
The animals push up from the water and strain their necks
to see me better. They snort a warning.
I've been there before and know they may bark, but don't bite.
Otters are fantastic hunters,
and the Rio Negro is full of fish.
They secure their breakfast in one short dive.
Today, otters have become a common sight in the Pantanal again.
But in the 1970s they were nearly extinct - just like the caimans.
While the reptiles were hunted for leather, the otters suffered
because of their thick, velvety fur.
They're not the best of friends; after all
they compete for the same prey.
Relationships are strained even among the reptiles.
Successful hunters can rarely enjoy their meal alone.
We do bathe in the rivers, by the way. Lakes are a no-go:
The piranhas are way too aggressive.
The larger the otter family, the greater their territory.
With 9 animals, this is a strong clan.
They built their den high up on the steep banks,
where they are safe from flooding.
All family members leave scent marks at the entrance.
They are rather pungent and a clear message to rivalling clans.
Behind the next bend lies the first stop
for some of my camera traps.
That would have been impossible to reach on horseback!
This is one of the positions the computer came up with.
Now I have to fix the camera around this huge trunk.
These are the same palms I cut back last time.
They stand no chance, as I return here every year.
The river bank is a favourite hangout for many animals.
It's always worth keeping your eyes open.
The most impressive is
the "King of the Jungle". The jaguar has returned to the Pantanal.
And even though people fear it, they are also proud to have
the majestic cat living next door.
Luck is on my side.
Those are fresh jaguar tracks.
You can tell from how the sand is still piled up.
The breeze would have blown them over pretty quickly.
All workers on the ranch carry radios: for safety reasons
and to tell each other about interesting sightings.
I'll better get going now.
After all, the jaguar could still be close.
Capybaras, peccaries and even birds
are part of the jaguars' diet,
so there is more than sufficient prey around.
Humans are not on the menu.
If you keep a respectful distance, there's nothing to fear.
I can hear the capybaras barking. When they spot a jaguar,
they sound out the alarm across the whole river.
Most definitely the cat sees me.
for some of my camera traps.
With its spotted fur it's almost invisible
in the speckled light of the forest.
One of my favourite animals awaits on the other side of the river.
This is the largest land animal in South America. The tapir!
I like them, even though this one isn't on his best behaviour.
And then - I can hardly believe my eyes!
Right on the shore, there is a jaguar.
It's a female; we call her Luciana.
When I first met her, she was still a youngster.
Being this close to her is breath-taking and -
admittedly - pretty thrilling.
Inspired, I decide to set up a camera trap in a special place.
This dried-out riverbed is like a highway for animals.
Maybe also for the jaguar?
The beach where I saw the jaguar prints earlier
is right through this "tunnel".
In the rainy season it's like a river.
Now that it's dry, you can spot lots of animal traces.
Maybe the jaguar that walked along the beach passes here as well.
So if I set up a camera trap
I could get lucky.
I might get a snap of the jaguar
whose paw prints I discovered this morning.
I always bring one camera extra
in case I discover something really cool.
Back at the riverbank Fernando is waiting for me.
He bears exciting news.
Ge, a jaguar researcher, wants to install a trap
further up the river. Fernando asks me,
if I would like to come - absolutely!
As it's too far for the canoe, I join him in his boat.
Fernando is a good friend. He has been living
on the ranch for decades and knows the land
and its animals inside out.
He's also the Fazenda's heart and soul.
For many years scientists like the veterinarian Ge
have been examining and tracking jaguars.
They study the cats' behaviour to learn how to protect them best.
It takes a lot of experience
to capture a big cat without causing harm or too much stress.
This is the key to success:
They anchor and conceal a lasso in the ground.
The noose will tighten around the jaguar's paw.
It won't harm the cat,
but will be firm enough to hold it.
They don't want the jaguar to hurt itself.
That barbed wire has to go, so there's no risk of injury.
Ge offers me to test the trap. I'm always up for something like that!
Plus, I can make sure, the jaguar really won't be harmed.
Apart from the scare,
the cat should be safe.
They put down sticks, so the jaguar will be forced to lift its paws
and not shuffle along.
It'll step directly into the noose.
Now for the camouflage.
They use the greenery to build a sort of funnel
that leads the jaguar right into the waiting lasso.
It takes about an hour, then we're done.
I cross my fingers Ge and his team will make a hit.
It's a long way back, and I still have to get my canoe.
The sun has long set when I reach the Fazenda.
A few hours later, Ge calls me over the radio:
A jaguar got caught in another trap,
right next to the lab. So I take off at once.
This is a very large male.
Ge fits him with a GPS collar.
After half an hour and a few more examinations
the whole procedure is done.
This cat weighs 120 kilos!
Jaguars this big only exist in the Pantanal.
It takes 5 men to carry the heavyweight outside.
For about a year the tracker will send its signals a few times daily.
The researchers record the size of the jaguars' territories,
which landscapes they prefer and whether they
cross paths with other collared jaguars.
I return just in time for the Churrasco,
the traditional barbecue.
We have meat ...
and much to talk about.
Especially the devastating fires in 2020.
From February to November they destroyed
almost a third of the Pantanal.
The first fires broke out when the water levels
had reached their highest point. In the western Pantanal
they raged relentlessly.
The rainy season was virtually non-existent.
We saw a lack of water in the whole of the Pantanal,
resulting in bone dry soils and plants.
In the end, the embers of a few camp sites were enough
to trigger a catastrophe.
The Pantanal has never known a drought like this in recent history.
Just a few months ago, I rode through water right here.
Climatologists have long predicted
that the Pantanal could lose about a third of its water.
Should this be the beginning?
It would spell disaster for the vulnerable wetland.
Basically, nature is a bit like this Jenga tower. An ecosystem is
made up of diverse animal and plant species.
If one of them goes extinct - like the anteater for example -
the tower won't collapse at once.
But when more species vanish, it becomes more unstable.
It's hard to predict, which block - which species -
will finally collapse the tower and, in other words, our ecosystem.
A healthy environment provides us with food, clear water
and clean air for free!
So we should take care of it.
That is why the protection of species is super important,
and that includes each and every single species.
But to conserve a species we need to know as much as possible about it.
I was among the first to study the giant anteater.
I discovered that you can recognize individuals
by looking at the fur patterns on their forelegs and shoulders.
My second scientific project affirms that mammals
seek shelter in the woods, especially when it's hot and dry.
It sounds simple but is an important finding:
If droughts increase in the future, and forests keep shrinking,
the animals won't have these crucial retreats anymore.
Much of the conservational progress in the Pantanal
achieved over decades could be reduced to nothing.
That would be a tragedy.
On one of my last rounds
I see Clawdia again. With a little surprise.
She has a big baby on her back.
That's unusual. This time of year, the anteaters give birth,
but this baby is at least 7 months old.
It's nearly as big as the mother.
So cute! And the little snout!
At that age it surely leaves the mother's back once in a while.
But we'll hardly get to see that.
The little one is almost invisible.
The pair have matched the stripes on their shoulders perfectly.
Nobody knows when young anteaters crawl off their mothers' backs.
Like so many other things about wild anteaters, it remains their secret.
That makes extraordinary sightings like this
all the more important.
This last year I was unbelievably lucky.
Eventually I did observe the baby climbing off Clawdia's back.
They spent a good bit of time apart, while the little one learned,
how to stick its nose in - and where.
It's a precious moment.
For observations like these you need a lot of time.
And that's why I'm going to return next year - to my wild second home
and my fascinating anteaters.
I hope they will roam this paradise in the heart of South America
for a long time to come.
